# ML_DataScience_Neural_based_project-details
A detailed explanation of all my Data science and Applied AI based projects and what learned from them

I am really interested in technological advancements that can have an influence on our daily lives. I feel that the field of Artificial Intelligence (AI) is the best fit for this goal. We've seen AI achieve amazing things in Finance, Social Media healthcare, security, surveillance, self-driving cars, and other fields. I intend to work in fields, creating creative Machine Learning (ML) solutions to severe social and industrial problems. 
 
1.	Cyberspace is increasingly vulnerable due to the increase in sophistication of cyber attacks, I am a person who values privacy and have worked on designing and implementing a Network Intrusion detection system using transfer learning under the supervision of Dr. Quamar Niyaz as a Summer intern at Purdue University. The growing popularity of ML and DL algorithms in a variety of fields has piqued the interest of cybersecurity experts who use ML/DL techniques to create effective NIDS When attack types are constantly expanding and changing, building these models is expensive and time-consuming. Moreover, these models require retraining on the updated network traffic data whenever a new attack is discovered. To solve the problem, I have trained the classification model, a five-layered 2D-CNN model by converting the data into a pixilated format using Gramian Angular fields (GAF), then used transfer learning on awid-3 dataset by freezing all the layers of the trained model and adding one softmax layer. Hence, we have only 650 trainable parameters out of 124,586 trainable parameters in the original model therefore significantly reducing our computing power and yielding a very good accuracy, we received an accuracy of 99.98% and on a test dataset of awid-1 after transfer learning, we get an accuracy of 98.13% on awid-3. The result of the project has been accepted to the IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications, 2023. The internship introduced me to various ML algorithms and techniques such as, time series imaging algorithms: Gramian Angular Field (GAF) and has helped me enhance my knowledge in the fields of Deep Neural Networks and Applied Machine Learning.

2.	I was always fascinated by how our brain manages to take so many features into account and make decisions by spending minimal energy. So I thought there must be a very efficient algorithm behind it which led me to the domain of brain-inspired Spiking Neural Network and neuromorphic computing which became the topic for my undergrad minor thesis, I worked on the implementation of a Spiking Neural Network (SNN) on FPGA under the supervision of my professor, Mohd. Hasan. The development of a Spiking Neural Network (SNN) introduces the concept of input sparsification over time by working on discrete spikes, thus circumnavigating the performance and power consumption issue with Vector-Matrix Multiplications (VMM). A 3-layer fully connected SNN model based on a modified LIF neuron model trained using gradient descent was proposed. A corresponding 8-bit Neuron Hardware Unit (NHU) operating at 50 MHz was developed using Verilog. Various techniques such as approximating multiplication by arithmetic shift operation and critical path length reduction were employed to simplify resource-intensive operations. The model was validated against two classes, i.e., 0 and 1, with a software model accuracy of 95.16% and post-implementation accuracy of 92.8% consuming 0.095 W. The results led me to present the findings in the form of a research paper, “Energy Efficient FPGA Implementation of a Spiking Neural Network” at GCAT, 2022. The project has helped me enhance my knowledge in the field of Machine Learning, Deep learning and further introduced me to the field of Neuromorphic Computing.
 
3.	Moreover, I was an intern at National Heart and Lung Institute. Human emotion is a very complex thing and the idea of machine predicting it is very intriguing to me so during my internship, I worked on finding auditory attention scores using a collection of EEG signals using a dataset called PhyAAt. The dataset contains physiological signals such as EEG, GSR, PPG obtained from an experiment of auditory attention on a natural speech from 26 test subjects. I have done data preprocessing, feature engineering, and artifact removal to classify the scores into three classes: Low, Medium, and High. I received an accuracy of 73%. Through this work, I got acquainted with deep learning techniques such as GRU and LSTM, physiological signals, and artifact removal techniques.

4.	In  my final year major project I worked on implementation of Better Graph Neural Network with multiclass classification on Movie Lens dataset to make a Recommender System. Traditional GCN models used in recommender systems are often complex and computationally expensive. They typically involve multiple layers, non-linear activation functions, and intricate aggregation mechanisms. However, these complexities can pose challenges in terms of training, scalability, and interpretability. To address these issues we used a simplified approach that focuses on leveraging the power of graph propagation for recommendations. It achieves this by directly propagating user-item interaction signals through the user-item bipartite graph, without incorporating non-linear activation functions or multiple layers. Instead, our model performs neighborhood aggregation through a simple element-wise multiplication operation between user and item embeddings. In addition, we introduces a personalized update mechanism, which enables the model to adapt to user-specific preferences and item characteristics. User and item embeddings are learned separately and then combined using a personalized propagation rule. The performance of our model is extensively evaluated on various benchmark datasets, comparing it against state-of-the-art recommendation models. The results demonstrate that model achieves competitive performance while significantly reducing complexity and improving scalability. It outperforms many complex GCN-based models while being computationally efficient Overall, model offers a practical and efficient solution for recommender systems by simplifying the graph convolutional network while maintaining competitive performance. Its simplicity and scalability make it a strong baseline model for future research in the field of recommendation systems and graph neural networks.

